# CookieBD database documentation

This document has the documentation for version `6.0.0` of **CookieDB**, check the file [CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/jaedsonpys/cookiedb/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md) to see all changes to the project.

> **FEATURE!** This version has ***19 TIMES higher performance*** than previous versions of CookieDB.

## Using CookieDB

See here a tutorial on how to use **CookieDB** in an easy and objective way.

### Manipulation

To manipulate the database, you must instantiate the `CookieDB` class passing (or not) some arguments, such as:

1. `key`: Any text can be used as a key, of any size;
2. `database_local`: directory where the database will be or is, if nothing is past, the current directory will be used;

> As of version `5.0.0`, all text passed as an argument to the `key` parameter will be encoded to a Fernet key. If you pass a Fernet key as an argument, it will be encoded again, preventing you from being able to access databases that were created using your own key (only for **versions smaller than 5.0.0**).

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
```

After that, you can perform any operation.

### Creating a database

To create a database, use the `CookieDB.create_database` method, passing (or not) some arguments:

1. `database_name`: name of the database;
2. `if_not_exists`: optional parameter, if the database does not exist, no error
It will be released.

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.create_database('MyDatabase')
```

### Opening a database

It is only possible to open a database if it exists, otherwise a exception will be thrown. There is no secret to open, just use the `CookieDB.open` method:

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')
```

All **CookieDB** database files (**from version `1.0.0`**) have a `.cookiedb` extension, when opening a database, CookieDB will look for the database name along with the `.cookiedb` extension (e.g. `MyDatabase.cookiedb`).

If you create a database using one key and try to open it using another, `InvalidDatabaseKeyError` **exception** will be thrown. Furthermore, if _no database is open_ and **write, read, update, or delete** operations are performed, the `NoOpenDatabaseError` exception will be thrown.

### Closing a database

To close a database, use the `close` method of the CookieDB class. If you use this method when no database is open, the `NoDatabaseOpenError` exception will be thrown.

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')

# ...performing operations on the database...

# close the database
cookiedb.close()
```

### Checking database

If you want to know which database it is in, use the `CookieDB.checkout` method:

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')
cookiedb.checkout()  # output: MyDatabase
```

If **no database** are open, `None` will be returned.

### Creating item

An "item" is an object in the database, which can be a dictionary, list, string, integer or float. The path can be just a string or an integer.

To create an item, we use the `CookieDB.add` method, which has the following parameters:

1. `path`: path of the item (where its value will be stored);
2. `value`: item value.

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')

cookiedb.add('languages', {
    'python': {
        'extension': '.py',
        'creator': 'Guido van Rossum'
    },
    'cpp': {
        'extension': '.cpp',
        'creator': 'Bjarne Stroustrup'
    }
})
```

Each path, separated by "/" (slash), is a **key** in the `JSON` file, creating an organized structure, see the example:

```python
path = 'languages/python'

# equivalent to:

json = {
    'languages': {
        'python': {}
    }
}
```

### Getting an item

To get an item, use the `CookieDB.get` method passing the argument `path` with the **path** of the item:

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')

languages = cookiedb.get('languages')
print(languages)

# or, get an item inside that item

python_info = cookiedb.get('languages/python')
print(python_info)
```

That is, you can get data through the **path** as long as the content is a dictionary (key and value).

### Updating an item

To update an item, use the `CookieDB.update` method. This method will only update **existing** items, if it doesn't exist the exception `ItemNotExistsError` will be thrown:

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')

cookiedb.add('languages', {
    'python': {
        'extension': '.py',
        'creator': 'Unknown'
    },
    'cpp': {
        'extension': '.cpp',
        'creator': 'Bjarne Stroustrup'
    }
})

# updating python language name
cookiedb.update('languages/python/creator', 'Guido van Rossum')
```

### Deleting an item

To delete an item, use the `CookieDB.delete` method passing the **path** that will be deleted:

```python
from cookiedb import CookieDB

cookiedb = CookieDB(key='secret')
cookiedb.open('MyDatabase')

languages = cookiedb.get('languages')
print(languages)

# delete item
cookiedb.delete('languages/python')

# updated items
languages = cookiedb.get('languages')
print(languages)
```

With that, just specify the path and you can delete whatever you want.